<html>
<title> - MEMBER DAY HEARING</title>
<body><pre>
[House Hearing, 117 Congress]
[From the U.S. Government Publishing Office]




                           MEMBER DAY HEARING

=======================================================================

                                HEARING

                               BEFORE THE

                      COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS
                        HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

                    ONE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH CONGRESS

                             FIRST SESSION

                               __________

                             March 26, 2021

                               __________

                           Serial No. 117-21

                               __________

        Printed for the use of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
        
        
        
        	 [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


       Available:  http://www.foreignaffairs.house.gov/, http://
                            docs.house.gov, 
                       or http://www.govinfo.gov
                       
                                                                  
                      		________
		       
		       
		    U.S. GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
		       
45-978 			    WASHINGTON : 2021
                       
                       

                      COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS

                  GREGORY W. MEEKS, New York, Chairman

BRAD SHERMAN, California             MICHAEL T. McCAUL, Texas, Ranking 
ALBIO SIRES, New Jersey                  Member
GERALD E. CONNOLLY, Virginia
THEODORE E. DEUTCH, Florida
KAREN BASS, California
WILLIAM KEATING, Massachusetts
DAVID CICILLINE, Rhode Island
AMI BERA, California
JOAQUIN CASTRO, Texas
DINA TITUS, Nevada
TED LIEU, California
SUSAN WILD, Pennsylvania
DEAN PHILLIPS, Minnesota
ILHAN OMAR, Minnesota
COLIN ALLRED, Texas
ANDY LEVIN, Michigan
ABIGAIL SPANBERGER, Virginia
CHRISSY HOULAHAN, Pennsylvania
TOM MALINOWSKI, New Jersey
ANDY KIM, New Jersey
SARA JACOBS, California
KATHY MANNING, North Carolina
JIM COSTA, California
JUAN VARGAS, California
VICENTE GONZALEZ, Texas
BRAD SCHNEIDER, Illinois

                                     CHRISTOPHER H. SMITH, New Jersey
                                     STEVE CHABOT, Ohio
                                     JOE WILSON, South Carolina
                                     SCOTT PERRY, Pennsylvania
                                     DARRELL ISSA, California
                                     ADAM KINZINGER, Illinois
                                     LEE ZELDIN, New York
                                     ANN WAGNER, Missouri
                                     BRIAN MAST, Florida
                                     BRIAN FITZPATRICK, Pennsylvania
                                     KEN BUCK, Colorado
                                     TIM BURCHETT, Tennessee
                                     MARK GREEN, Tennessee
                                     ANDY BARR, Kentucky
                                     GREG STEUBE, Florida
                                     DAN MEUSER, Pennsylvania
                                     CLAUDIA TENNEY, New York
                                     AUGUST PFLUGER, Texas
                                     PETER MEIJER, Michigan
                                     NICOLE MALLIOTAKIS, New York
                                     RONNY JACKSON, Texas
                                     YOUNG KIM, California
                                     MARIA ELVIRA SALAZAR, Florida

                    Sophia Lafargue, Staff Director

               Brendan Shields, Republican Staff Director
                            C O N T E N T S

                              ----------                              
                                                                   Page

                               WITNESSES

Meng, Hon. Grace, a Representative in Congress from the State of 
  New York.......................................................     4
Case, Hon. Ed, a Representative in Congress from the State of 
  Hawaii.........................................................     9
Hill, Hon. French, a Representative in Congress from the State of 
  Arkansas.......................................................    14

                                APPENDIX

Hearing Notice...................................................    18
Hearing Minutes..................................................    19
Hearing Attendance...............................................    20

                  ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS FOR THE RECORD

Additional statement for the record from Representative Pete 
  Sessions.......................................................    20
Additional statement for the record from Representative H. Morgan 
  Griffith.......................................................    22
Additional statement for the record from Representative John 
  Garamendi......................................................    24

 
                           MEMBER DAY HEARING

                         Friday, March 26, 2021

                          House of Representatives,
                      Committee on Foreign Affairs,
                                                    Washington, DC.
    The committee met, pursuant to notice, at 3:08 p.m., via 
Webex, Hon. Gregory Meeks (Chairman of the committee) 
presiding.
    Chairman Meeks. The Committee on Foreign Affairs will come 
to order.
    Without objection, the Chair is authorized to declare a 
recess of the committee at any point.
    And all Members will have 5 days to submit statements, 
extraneous material, and questions for the record, subject to 
the length limitation in the rules. To insert something into 
the record, pleas have your staff email the previously 
mentioned address or contact full committee staff.
    As a reminder to Members, please keep your video function 
on at all times, even when you are not recognized by the Chair. 
Members are responsible for muting and unmuting themselves, and 
please remember to mute yourself after you finish speaking.
    Consistent with House rules, staff will only mute Members 
as appropriate, when they are not under recognition, so that 
they can eliminate background noise.
    I see that we have a quorum, and I now recognize myself for 
opening remarks.
    Pursuant to notice, we meet today to conduct a Members Day 
Hearing to hear from our colleagues on their legislative 
priorities that fall within the jurisdiction of the Committee 
on Foreign Affairs.
    I welcome our colleagues to the Foreign Affairs Committee, 
and we are pleased to have this opportunity today to hear from 
our colleagues about their legislative priorities, especially 
colleagues who do not sit on the best committee in the House of 
Representatives.
    This Congress will preside over a historic shift in U.S. 
foreign policy, and there is no shortage of work ahead for our 
legislative body and this committee. It is critical that we 
look ahead to the realities and challenges of the 21st century. 
Financial crises, pandemics, climate change, and the rise of 
authoritarianism are indeed worldwide problems that have far-
reaching domestic impacts.
    These challenges will require global solutions, which will 
undoubtedly overlap committee jurisdictions. Likewise, our 
foreign policy is interdependent on having a domestic policy 
that reflects the values we champion abroad.
    As Members of the U.S. Congress, the diversity of our 
districts and the diasporas that make up our communities give 
each member invaluable insight. It is critical that this 
committee works closely with the entire Congress.
    And it is in that spirit this hearing offers an open 
platform for Members who may hear their--so that Members can 
hear their legislative proposals, and for some of our most 
pressing foreign affair-related challenges are heard.
    This of course will not be the only opportunity to engage 
with representatives from our other committees. As Chair of the 
House Foreign Affairs Committee, my door is always open. I look 
forward to hearing from you and your ideas.
    I now turn to Mr. Green for his remarks.
    Mr. Green. Thank you, Chairman Meeks. And really appreciate 
you convening this important hearing to give our colleagues an 
opportunity to present their legislative ideas before the 
committee.
    At a time of unprecedented challenges around the globe, 
from the coronavirus pandemic to a rising China, of course, the 
human crisis at our southern border, the work of this committee 
is more important than ever, and the participation of every 
Member of Congress is indispensable.
    I look forward to continuing to work with you, sir, and 
lead Republican McCaul, on these issues. And I look forward to 
hearing from our Members today.
    Thank you, sir, and I yield.
    Chairman Meeks. I thank Mr. Green. And I should put out--I 
know Ranking Member McCaul is not here, but I want to thank 
Ranking Member McCaul for his work and cooperation and working 
in a bipartisan spirit on this committee. Glad to have Mr. 
Green with us.
    Each witness will now have 5 minutes to testify and then 
answer questions from Members of the committee. However, this 
hearing is intended to be primarily a listening session. 
Witnesses testifying today will be recognized in the order in 
which they arrive. So I look forward to hearing the testimony.
    I now recognize my friend and fellow New Yorker, 
Representative Grace Meng, for 5 minutes.

STATEMENT OF HON. GRACE MENG, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM 
                     THE STATE OF NEW YORK

    Ms. Meng. Thank you, Chairman Meeks, Ranking Member McCaul, 
and distinguished Members of this committee. Thank you for this 
opportunity to discuss several of my priorities that are under 
the jurisdiction of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. I 
always look back on my time on this committee so fondly. I'm 
grateful to the many friendships I have made, and I look 
forward to being together in person with you all again soon.
    First, I really want to thank this committee for marking up 
my Refugee Sanitation Facility Safety Act just yesterday. Thank 
you, in particular, to Representative Lee Zeldin, my partner in 
this effort. One of my top priorities as a Member of Congress 
is protecting those who are vulnerable around the world, 
whether women and girls seeking an education or employment, 
those who lack access to basic services, or victims of natural 
disasters.
    As vice Chair of the State and Foreign Operations House 
Appropriations Committee, I am proud to do what I can to help 
direct our Federal funding priorities to address these 
concerns. During the 117th Congress, I hope this committee will 
champion bills that protect vulnerable women and girls around 
the world.
    Today I want to bring to your attention a few pieces of 
legislation, some of which have already been introduced and 
others which I will reintroduce in the coming months. First, I 
would like to discuss the Safe from the Start Act, H.R. 571, 
which aims to prevent and respond to gender-based violence from 
the onset of emergencies.
    This legislation helps the humanitarian community take 
preventative measures to ensure that quality services are 
available to survivors from the onset of an emergency or 
crisis. Crises like the COVID-19 pandemic exacerbate risks for 
GBV, which is exactly what Safe from the Start is set up to 
mitigate.
    I am thankful to the bipartisan co-leads of this 
legislation, Representatives Chris Stewart, Lois Frankel, Mario 
Diaz-Balart, and Chrissy Houlahan, as well as the co-sponsors 
who sit on this committee, Chairman Meeks, Representatives 
Phillips, Cicilline, Costa, Titus, Deutch, Lowenthal, Connelly, 
Spanberger, Bass, Wild, Kinzinger, and Young Kim.
    I also introduced the Divided Families Reunification Act, 
H.R. 826, with Representative Van Taylor as well as my 
colleagues on this committee, Representatives Sherman, Bass, 
Omar, Andy Kim, Schneider, Connelly, and Young Kim.
    Over 70 years ago, the division of the Korean Peninsula 
into the two Koreas separated millions of Koreans from their 
family Members. This bill requires the Secretary of State or a 
designee to consult with officials in South Korea on potential 
opportunities to reunite Korean American families with their 
family Members in North Korea and requires the special envoy on 
North Korean human rights to submit a report on the 
opportunities for video reunion.
    I will also be introducing the Youth Peace and Security 
Act, along with Representatives Fitzpatrick and Phillips. Youth 
populations have long been at the forefront of building peace 
in their communities by creating youth-led movements to 
mitigate negative effects of conflict and to prevent recurring 
cycles of violence. After all, it will be the young people who 
bear the burden of sustaining the peace over generations and 
lead their society from reconciliation to prosperity.
    I look forward to introducing this legislation and hope to 
have the committee's support.
    Finally, I will also introduce the Global Wildlife 
Trafficking Biosecurity Act with Representative Jeff 
Fortenberry. This bill is an entirely international response to 
end commercial trade in live wildlife for human consumption. It 
does this by incentivizing governments to address the root 
causes of zoonotic pandemics through international cooperation 
and powers U.S. assistance for health surveillance, wildlife 
trade enforcement, biodiversity, and food security.
    Thank you again for allowing me to testify today and for 
your leadership on critical issues of human rights and national 
security. I look forward to continue working with this 
committee in the 117th Congress.
    [The prepared statement of Ms. Meng follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    
    Chairman Meeks. Thank you so much for your remarks, 
Representative Meng. The committee looks forward, of course, to 
continuing to work with you. And I just want to thank you for 
your excellent work reducing the vulnerabilities for women and 
girls--that women and girls face, and whether it is access to 
sanitation in refugee camps or protection in humanitarian 
crises or being excluded from peacebuilding where their voices 
are so crucial and critical.
    And I just want you to know that our foreign policy 
efforts, through diplomacy, development, and defense, are made 
stronger with women fully empowered and at the table being 
heard.
    I am so pleased to have marked up, as you indicated, your 
refugee sanitation bill in our committee yesterday, and it 
passed with bipartisan support. And I look forward to 
continuing to partner with you and others on HFAC as we 
consider our priorities, and yours, as you have just dealt 
with. Of course, human rights is something that is on the very 
front burner for us on the committee also. So I thank you so 
very much.
    Mr. Green, anything that you want to add?
    Mr. Green. No, sir. I just appreciate the member bringing 
these to us. We look forward to the bills.
    Chairman Meeks. Thank you.
    I now recognize--I am trying to see if I see him--
Representative Garamendi. Is he with us?
    Ms. Stiles. No, sir. Not at the moment.
    Chairman Meeks. So who--I cannot see. Who else do we have 
with us today? Representative Case?
    Mr. Case. I'm here.
    Chairman Meeks. Who do we have?
    Mr. Case. Good to go?
    Chairman Meeks. Yes. Representative Case, you are now 
recognized.

 STATEMENT OF HON. ED CASE, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS FROM 
                      THE STATE OF HAWAII

    Mr. Case. Chair Meeks, Mr. Green, Members of the committee, 
aloha from Honolulu, Hawai'i, Pacific Ocean. Thank you for the 
opportunity to again testify before the committee.
    In my last Member Day testimony to this committee in 
December 2019, I highlighted the importance of the vast Pacific 
Islands region and urged this committee and Congress to pursue 
efforts to broaden and deepen our engagement in this critical 
part of the world.
    A few months prior to that, I had joined several of my 
colleagues in co-founding the congressional Pacific Islands 
Caucus, the first-ever such organization of Members focused on 
this critical region. We followed with the introduction of H.R. 
7797, our Boosting Long-Term U.S. Engagement in the Pacific 
Act, otherwise titled the BLUE Pacific Act, to establish a 
comprehensive long-term framework for U.S. foreign policy in 
the Pacific Islands.
    Since then, the challenges and opportunities for our 
country and the Pacific Islands and the broader Indo-Pacific 
have grown far more acute and urgent.
    To continue Congress' leadership in forging the best path, 
earlier this month we formally reconstituted our Pacific 
Islands Caucus, co-Chaired on a non-partisan basis by me; the 
dean of this house, Mr. Young; and Representatives Sherman, 
Bera, Chabot, and Wagner of this committee.
    Today I return to again ask for your full support of our 
caucus and its goals, including our improved soon-to-be 
reintroduced BLUE Pacific Act. Our initiative focuses is on 
three essential pillars: security, development, and shared 
values.
    It would expand diplomatic and development presence, 
increase maritime security cooperation and assistance, deepen 
and diversify trade, support regional economic and social 
development in areas like public health and education, invest 
in climate adaptation and climate-resilient infrastructure, 
promote shared values like press freedom and gender equality, 
and strengthen people-to-people relationships and civil 
society.
    In naming this bill, we pay tribute to the concept of the 
BLUE Pacific embraced by leaders of the Pacific Islands Forum 
as a shared identity and platform for collective action. This 
legislation would integrate our efforts with the work of 
existing regional institutions and frameworks, including those 
of our like-minded allies and partners, such as Australia, New 
Zealand, Japan, Taiwan, and more.
    Both our caucus and this legislation have been very well 
received by our allies and partners throughout the Indo-
Pacific. We believe these initiatives are the responsible 
response by Congress to the significantly increased level of 
attention in Washington on the Pacific Islands in just the past 
few years.
    Driving much of this increased interest is China's 
increased activity and influence in this region that has 
triggered alarm among our foreign policy and national security 
communities. Yet it would be a big mistake to characterize U.S. 
interests in the Pacific Islands as purely a response to 
current changing regional dynamics.
    The United States is, and always has been, a Pacific 
nation. And as such, we share interests, values, and, most of 
all, a common destiny with the peoples and countries of this 
region.
    We have goodwill and networks in the Pacific Islands built 
by decades of quiet and consistent engagement at all levels of 
American society, ranging from government to ordinary 
Americans. Through programs hosted by the Peace Corps and 
Hawai'i's own East-West Center, over the past 20 years in 
particular, the United States has contributed over 5 billion in 
assistance for the region. The idea that the U.S. is a recent 
newcomer to the Pacific could not be more wrong.
    Nevertheless, a coordinated strategy of U.S. engagement in 
the Pacific Islands has never been more necessary. COVID-19 has 
devastated the region's travel and tourism economy, even as 
longstanding development challenges persist. Regionalism, long 
a hallmark of the Pacific, faces uncertainty and reasonable 
demands for reform to ensure all Pacific countries and voices 
are represented.
    Above all, climate change looms over the future of the 
region as an existential threat to these island nations, their 
people, and their livelihoods.
    Our initiatives in Congress are sending a clear message to 
the Pacific Islands that we stand with them in the face of 
these challenges, that the United States is a neighbor and 
partner to all those who share common aspirations for a 
regional order built on mutual assistance and benefit, free of 
coercion and fully respectful of democracy, human rights, and 
the sovereignty of all nations.
    I sincerely look forward to working with the committee and 
its Members and staff all over again on increasing and 
sustaining U.S. engagement in the Pacific Islands.
    Thank you very much for your time and consideration.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Case follows:]

    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    
    [Pause.]
    Mr. Green. Mr. Chairman, I think you might be unmuted.
    Ms. Stiles. I think we may be experiencing some technical 
difficulties with the Chair's account. If we could just pause 
for 1 second, so we can look into it.
    [Pause.]
    Mr. Malinowski [presiding]. Hi, everyone. This is 
Congressman Malinowski. I think I may jump in here, just to 
move us along while we wait for Chairman Meeks to come back.
    And so to do that, I wanted to thank Representative Case 
for your presentation, sir, and to also--and to recognize 
Representative Hill for 5 minutes.

  STATEMENT OF HON. FRENCH HILL, A REPRESENTATIVE IN CONGRESS 
                   FROM THE STATE OF ARKANSAS

    Mr. Hill. Well, thank you for the time. I want to thank 
Chairman Meeks and Ranking Member McCaul, and my friend Dr. 
Green, and the Members of the committee, for giving those of us 
not serving on the House Foreign Affairs Committee an 
opportunity to visit on our priorities.
    I appreciate the chance today to brief the committee about 
my resolution H.Res. 117, supporting Coptic Christians in 
Egypt, which has a diverse and bipartisan coalition of Members 
that co-sponsor it.
    I would also like to give special thanks to my friend and 
Democratic lead on this measure, Foreign Affairs Committee 
member Dave Cicilline of Rhode Island. Currently, this bill has 
17 co-sponsors. In the last Congress, my resolution had 71 co-
sponsors, including 25 on the House Foreign Affairs Committee.
    I decided to introduce this legislation following a 2017 
visit to Egypt. While preparing for the trip, visiting the 
country, and returning home, I repeatedly heard about the 
plight of Coptic Christians in Egypt. Although the Copts have 
been the victims of numerous terrorist attacks by groups like 
ISIS, what was most disturbing to me were the attacks against 
Copts carried out by their fellow Egyptians.
    That is why on January 16, 2019, I originally introduced 
this resolution expressing support for Coptic Christians and 
religious liberty in Egypt. H.Res. 117 acknowledges the 
importance of the U.S.-Egypt partnership in advancing our 
common interests, recognizes Egypt's need for certain 
governmental reforms, and calls on the Egyptian government to 
end what has become a culture of impunity and makes examples by 
arresting, prosecuting, and convicting those responsible for 
attacks on Christians. It also calls on government to hold 
those local government officials accountable who fail to 
enforce the law.
    In the Minya Province of Upper Egypt, in late November, a 
mother and her son were stabbed by a Muslim man while sitting 
out in front of their home after being told that Christians 
were not allowed outside. Luckily, they were not killed. Sadly, 
this is a persistent narrative in Minya.
    In the 2018 and 2019 State Department reports on religious 
freedom in Egypt, they each mentioned Minya Province more than 
any other province in the country.
    Also, Ramy Kamel, a Coptic Christian and founder of Coptic 
Christian Rights Organization, was arrested by Egyptian police 
and has been accused of numerous terrorism-related charges. It 
is also reported that he has undergone intensive interrogation 
and has been given no legal representation.
    Unfortunately, cases like this in Egypt are becoming more 
numerous. Our country and our citizens over the generations 
have worked mightily to uphold the values and unalienable 
rights granted to us by God and enshrined in our founding 
documents.
    We offer vocal support of free expression abroad, 
particularly in the form of advocacy for religious tolerance 
and freedom, the rule of law, human rights, education for women 
and minorities. These are fundamental tenets of our foreign 
policy.
    Likewise, I have met with religious leaders from all across 
the Levant, from Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, Jerusalem, with an eye 
toward better shaping American and allied support for 
Christians and other persecuted religious minorities.
    In previous years, Pope Francis, together with the Grand 
Imam from Egypt's most important Al-Azhar Mosque, issued a 
message on human fraternity inviting, and I quote, ``All 
persons who have faith in God and faith in human fraternity to 
unite and work together, so it may serve as a guide for future 
generations to advance a culture of mutual respect in the 
awareness of the great divine grace that makes all human beings 
brothers and sisters.''
    The public coming together of Catholicism and Islam is a 
powerful statement to all governments around the world, but 
particularly those in the Middle East, to support religious 
freedom and religious tolerance. This was on display recently 
for the whole world to see as Pope Francis toured ancient 
Mesopotamia, said Mass in Baghdad, and met with the Grand 
Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani.
    I have great respect for Egyptian President el-Sisi, and I 
applaud the changes in message that he has made in the area of 
religious tolerance. He continues to say and do the right 
things at the top level of government. This includes having a 
good relationship with the Coptic Pope, attending Mass on 
multiple occasions, reconstructing churches that have been 
destroyed, constructing the largest Christian cathedral in the 
Middle East in the new administration center, and holding 
terrorists accountable for their atrocities.
    However, since 1978, the United States has provided Egypt 
with what now totals over $50 billion in military and $30 
billion in economic assistance. I believe there is more to do. 
As the fourth-highest receiver of annual American aid in the 
world, the U.S. Government must use the tools that we have to 
hold our good allies like Egypt to a higher standard, if they 
are to continue to receive our sense of aid and partnership.
    It is in this regard that I believe one vehicle readily 
available to this committee is to highlight the U.S. 
Government's concern over the treatment of Coptic Christians in 
Egypt. And that is the resolution, H.Res. 117.
    In conclusion, let's recall President Reagan's admonition 
as to our responsibility. He said, ``Respect for human rights 
is not social work. It is not merely an act of compassion. It 
is the first obligation of government and the source of its 
legitimacy.''
    I thank my friends on House Foreign Affairs. I appreciate 
you, Chairman Meeks. And I appreciate the opportunity to spend 
a few minutes with you this afternoon. Thank you, and I yield 
back.
    [The prepared statement of Mr. Hill follows:]

    
    [GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]
    
    
    Mr. Malinowski. Thank you so much, Congressman Hill. And we 
very much look forward to working with you on Egypt and human 
rights in general. I very much appreciate those words from 
President Reagan. I think those speak for all of us.
    I see Chairman Meeks has gotten back on. Welcome back, 
Chairman.
    Chairman Meeks [presiding]. Thank you. Thank you for 
stepping in. Technology. I thought something else was 
happening, but I did hear much of what Congressman Hill had to 
say. And like you, I just want to thank him. You know, I have 
known Congressman Hill for a while. I thank him for his 
leadership on the issue of protecting the rights and the safety 
of the Coptic Christians in Egypt.
    And as you know, the Coptic community has been the victim 
of discrimination, harassment, and deadly violence, and I 
intend to keep this issue high on the agenda of the State 
Department. I am happy to work with my good friend, 
Representative Hill, as he moves forward this Congress on this 
important issue.
    So thank you, French, for that. It was unfortunate I could 
not see you, but I could hear you.
    Mr. Hill. Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the time, and my 
best wishes.
    Chairman Meeks. Very good.
    And I do not know whether I missed it, did Mr. Garamendi--
was he able to join us? I know he was Chairing another hearing, 
but I know he wanted to be on. So I do not know whether or not 
he was able to join us.
    Ms. Stiles. He was not able to, sir.
    Chairman Meeks. Okay. So I think Mr. Hill was our last 
witness. So I want to thank all of you for testifying today, as 
well as all of the Members on the Foreign Affairs Committee. We 
appreciate the testimony, and we will consider them as the 
Foreign Affairs Committee considers its legislative priorities 
for next year.
    Again, I hope everyone has had, and will have, a good 
weekend, and I now adjourn this hearing.
    [Whereupon, at 3:36 p.m., the committee was adjourned.]

                                APPENDIX

	[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


                  ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS FOR THE RECORD


	[GRAPHIC(S) NOT AVAILABLE IN TIFF FORMAT]


                                 [all]
</pre></body></html>
